[Music]
hello world on this episode of the
concrete podcast I talked to dr. Dominic
D'Agostino DOM is an associate professor
in the department of molecular
pharmacology and physiology at the
University of South Florida Missoni
College of Medicine and a senior
research scientist at the Institute of
human and machine cognition
Dom's primary focus is developing and
testing metabolic therapies like the
ketogenic diet which can effectively
treat many forms of cancer and epileptic
seizures in addition to being one of the
smartest people I know he is also one of
the strongest he has dead lifted 500
pounds for 10 reps immediately after a 7
day fast as fitness and weight training
has always been a huge part of his life
some of his research has been funded by
the Department of Defense the Office of
Naval Research and many other private
organizations if you have any questions
about diet and nutrition cancer
prevention or longevity you will enjoy
this conversation with dr. Dominic
D'Agostino enjoy the show
so so yeah how did you get into
initially getting get into talking about
your work on podcasts and like an on the
internet and mainstream media yeah
well I knew about the ketogenic diet and
my research took me in the direction of
using a ketogenic diet for oxygen
toxicity seizures which is a limitation
for hyperbaric oxygen therapy which we
can talk about and also it is a
limitation of Navy SEAL divers that use
a closed-circuit rebreather because they
breathe high concentrations of oxygen
and in low circuit and that research the
technologies that we developed to do
that type of research were essentially
hyperbaric chambers that had
technologies inside that I had used for
years including confocal microscopes
atomic force microscopes patch-clamp
electrophysiology these are all
techniques that a your neuroscientist
uses and I was a neuroscientist for my
PhD and also my postdoc and it to do the
research that the military wanted we
need to put these things inside a
hyperbaric chamber these types of
techniques okay and and in doing so we
started looking at different cell types
and one was a cancer cell type and
ultimately that project led to looking
at the ketogenic diet and hyperbaric
oxygen as a cancer therapy and I did a
TEDx talk about that okay and that got
the publication and the TEDx talk got
exposure and you can look at that to see
without going into too much design
detail that particular topic not so much
the oxygen toxicity for a Navy SEAL
topic but the the the topic of using a
ketogenic diet and also hyperbaric
oxygen therapy for cancer got attention
and I did a couple smaller podcasts but
joe mercola reached out to me I didn't
know much about him I didn't know that
he had a really big reach yeah and I did
a little bit I just associated him
like things that I know he had sort of a
he was very controversial and he
especially in regards to things like EMF
or GMOs and glyphosate and things that I
really was on the fence about and didn't
really have a strong negative opinion
towards so so but I looked at his
podcast and the information he was
putting out there and saw a lot of it
was relevant and he had some bigger
names on there so I decided to do it and
within you know 24-48 hours had like a
quarter million views and I think a lot
of opportunities came out of that and as
an academic scientists who had just
transitioned into a tenure-track
position kind of mainstream conventional
scientists I you know some of my
academic peers may have looked down on
you know doing a job Mercola podcast but
I really think that he puts out a lot of
information that's good some of it's on
the edge of fringe but some of the stuff
that he was really a leading kind of he
does a lot of outreach and information
and a lot of it really was looking
forward or had a lot of foresight into
things like that we know now like
glyphosate for example or roundup and I
grew up on a farm
spraying tons of that I was a sprayer
kid you know oh really it up on the
thing and put the concentrate in and
spray without a mask and you know GMO
crops were growing our answer I never
gave any of this stuff a second thought
and even as an academic scientist I
didn't but when it it was actually his
website that I stumbled upon and and a
lot of stuff that I was not aware about
aware of in regards to the toxicity of
some of these agents and things like
that so so he put a lot of things on my
radar that were kind of interesting and
and he took a particular interest in
metabolism ketogenic diets and
hyperbaric option therapy and that was
essentially the first podcast that maybe
got me into the influencer space in this
category
Wow and so that thing kind of blew up
and got over a million views and I think
it's not led to do
Tim Ferriss and Joe Rogan and yeah you
know a Tim Ferriss my friend of mine
Peter tia who also has a great a really
good podcast that has incredible podcast
notes and it's like actually a very good
resource for people with just interested
in science and when it goes super deep
on a topic he had I believe introduced
me to him through an email and we
started communicating and and I didn't
actually know Tim Ferriss either at the
time maybe two thousand twelve or
thirteen and then I did his podcast and
it actually did two more I did a total
of three podcasts with Tim and and have
since became a huge fan of the content
content that he puts out so he's it's
very sort of like Rogen very eclectic
and you know the types of people he has
on him yes if it's out I'm the first
podcast really you know I was enamoured
by that first podcast with Tim even
though the FIR it was kind of a lot of
stuff to digest like a lot of the weight
a lot of like the terms you guys use
he's obviously very educated when it
comes to you know science and and the
stuff that you guys are talking about
some of the words that you guys are
using is kind of hard for someone like
me kind of like a normal everyday guy to
understand but he breaks it down he does
break it down towards the end yeah yeah
you know I didn't really prepare it off
of that
that podcast and that has been sort of a
trend like I just don't really prepare
for it he didn't really give me a lot of
like I'm gonna ask you this or that I
knew I asked you before I came on here
yeah what questions just until I
preemptively know what's gone going on
but yeah I remember I was teaching and I
had to run to get on the Skype call or
whatever and I was just like okay I got
it put on another hat here and just
talked and I just I felt like I babbled
at the end of it yeah it was only
supposed to be 90 minutes and I think I
went like two and a half or two two or
three I use like almost three hours yeah
and I was thinking oh man I hope he
edits this up because I just rambled on
I just but yeah the feedback has been
pretty good on that so I guess I rambled
in areas that were helpful that was
amazing
did you prepare it all for the Joe Rogan
podcast or was that just sort of like on
a whim as well yeah I became a little
bit more prepared
No you know he had such a big platform
and there was because sometimes you just
get into a topic or he leads you and
it's a discussion you forget some of the
reasons you know why you're doing what
you're doing so I kind of plug the
office of Navy research the Charlie
Foundation which was probably the first
website I ever stumbled upon with the
ketogenic diet and that got me that sort
of revealed to me that the ketogenic
diet was a medical therapy for epilepsy
and I was sort of contracted by office
of Navy research to develop a neuro
protective anti seizure strategy and I
had done an undergrad in nutrition
science at Rutgers University and it
became an opportunity for me to revisit
nutrition and actually make that the
basis of my whole scientific sort of you
know progress or platform as a research
scientist at USF so I can introduce that
and kind of reduce some of the
drug-related research that I thought I
was going to do looking at like drug
compounds that were antioxidants or
anti-seizure drugs and it became
refreshing to just reintroduce nutrition
back in because I've always been I'm a I
majored in nutrition and biology and
neuroscience are in Rutgers before going
into a neuroscience program and kind of
left nutrition out of my whole PhD but
always wanted to go back to it so my
postdoctoral fellowship and in
transition into a tenure-track position
really gave me that opportunity to
revisit food as medicine you know and or
nutritional compounds that we developed
to as therapies and medicine that's
amazing and how did you get the continue
the story on how you initially got
involved with the Department of Defense
in developing developing what you
developed for the Navy SEALs and and
what the implementation was for the Navy
SEALs like what were their missions that
were specifically involved with well
this research was really basic science
research and settle ongoing and the
stuff that we're doing now in humans is
actually done as a subcontract would
Duke so they have these environmental
change
where we kind of dive people in and out
of a ketogenic diet and look at their
their response so looking back it was
kind of a circuitous route to it but as
a PhD student I I knew I was going into
a lab that was funded by the military
and two or three years before I actually
graduated and I started writing
proposals to office of Navy research and
one got funded that developed the
technology which was hyperbaric
microscopy and the that the results from
that experiment kind of led me down the
path like targeting mitochondria energy
metabolism those sorts of things and and
the the whole basis behind that first
postdoctoral fellowship grant was to
understand the molecular mechanisms of
oxygen toxicity seizures okay so the
technologies that we developed helped us
understand it in ways that we didn't
know before and I kind of realized that
nutrition targeting energy metabolism
was a way to go and then I stumbled upon
the ketogenic diet which was a diet used
for drug refractory epilepsy when when
the drugs did not work to control
epilepsy the standard of care actually
was to put a patient on a ketogenic diet
and then in about 60% to 70% of patients
who do a ketogenic diet when drugs fail
the diet can work remarkably well in
people has it has a positive effect and
in like fifteen to twenty percent or
maybe 10 to 15 percent are super
responders meaning that they never have
a seizure again they followed the diet
and they wean themselves off and then
they never get again so it is some
people have labeled it a cure for
epilepsy in that subpopulation so to me
that I didn't know that and I majored in
nutrition and we didn't talk about the
ketogenic diet only the negative effects
of like the Atkins diet or low carb diet
or high protein diets which I actually
at the time I thought the ketogenic diet
was a high protein diet you know having
gone through a top-tier nutrition
program I still did not have any idea
what a ketogenic diet was
so only I took it upon myself to do the
research I connected with the people who
were doing the research at Johns Hopkins
mostly I bought dr. Freeman was alive at
the time and dr. Eric Kossoff who had
did work with the ketogenic diet and the
modified ketogenic diet which was higher
in protein and it was like almost a diet
that I could follow so it was much more
liberal and protein instead of the
restricted eight to twelve percent it
was like twenty to upwards of
twenty-five or thirty percent protein so
I decided to like do the ketogenic diet
I was learning about it I connected with
patients like Mike dancer we connected
in a nutrition forum and he was in
patient with epilepsy in the UK and he
did the diet and it worked for him and
this is all why I was like researching
the diet I connected with dr. Mary
Newport whose husband had Alzheimer's
disease and she was using a ketogenic
strategy which was like MCT oil and
coconut oil which can elevate your
ketones and later a ketone ester that
was developed by dr. Richard Veatch at
the NIH who passed away about a month
ago actually and these are all key
people that were really the reason like
why I went into this area so I realized
you know Hopkins was doing research
there was a lot of publications I
connected with people here in the Tampa
Bay area people abroad and it motivated
me to contact the program manager at the
Department of Defense or the office of
Navy research and say hey here look at
all the science here you have top tier
academic Institute's doing research on
the ketogenic diet for a broad range of
seizure disorders so it seemed to be
independent of the seizure type the
ketogenic diet worked remarkably well
for many different seizure types so
oxygen toxicity seizures is a type of
seizure that causes you know these grand
mal or tonic-clonic seizures so that the
science was there on this diet that
didn't really know existed as a medical
therapy and I realized that the military
did some research it wasn't too public
but I did find some of it on PubMed
where they
fasted rats for 24 and 36 hours and it
made them like super rats so it made
them resistant to oxygen toxicity up to
200 and I think a 36-hour fast was like
250% delay in the time that they get
seizures and the best seizure drugs only
work to that and you have to dose them
up so high the animals basically like in
a in a sedated state so you could not
load up a Navy SEAL
with anti-seizure drugs because they
have a they reduce cognitive and
physical performance and then throw him
into battle right right so so the next
question was the ketogenic diet appears
to not really alter your performance
that much cognitive it may enhance it
and physical performance was still I
didn't know too much about it but I
realized that Geoff Bullock who is now
at Ohio State University built a whole
sort of academic career studying the
performance effects of low-carb
ketogenic diets so that gave me more
ammunition sort of so to speak to give
the program officer to say hey there are
all these different applications of a
ketogenic diet can you give me you know
I'm proposing to get a million plus
dollars to really fund this so it was a
it was a lot of back and forth and maybe
about a year and a half before I
actually got like the grant was awarded
and then when money started coming in to
the University of South Florida they
like it you know it's federal funds that
pay indirect switch you know they can
use you know for different things and it
was significant amount of money
equivalent to like an NIH kind of grant
so it that set me up academically into
my tenure track position to do a whole
decade now of research on the ketogenic
diet so it started with oxygen toxicity
we developed ketogenic agents like
exogenous ketones supplementation ketone
esters you may have heard of yeah so
these things sort of developed and were
utilized in our research and we
published about them and ultimately I
was part of bringing ketone salts which
are exhaust ketones to the market okay
we had a number of patents
then different different organizations
got these patents and then commercial
product starts showing up so I was
actually me and Patrick Arnold were part
of that and Patrick Arnold was he was
also on on Tim Ferriss Joe if you
haven't listened yeah good yes to have
on interesting background but his
background was performance enhancement
soho okay I physically
yeah so he was involved in well you can
just look up Patrick Arnold okay he did
as a chemist so he has a very
interesting background but he was very
willing and interested and able to
develop a compound that I needed whereas
all my connections in academia or not
really willing or to develop this
particular ketogenic compound so when he
did develop a series of sort of
prototype compounds one particular
compound that he purified worked
remarkably well for oxygen toxicity
seizures and then we went on to use that
compound in everything from cancer to
Angelman syndrome which is a genetic
disorder
we now have Angelman syndrome clinical
trials at Vanderbilt is being done on
exogenous ketones glucose lowering
effects anti-inflammatory effects it
enhances it has behavioral effects that
can reduce anxiety so this is work that
my wife did as a behavioral
neurosciences person so yeah we
developed sort of novel agents and then
novel agents that when you give them
orally they mimic the effect of the
ketogenic diet or mimic the effect of
fasting okay so if I was to consume a
ketone ester right now if say if I was
eating carbohydrates but I follow a
ketogenic diet most of em and you take a
person and you give them a ketone ester
and you measure their metabolic markers
it would look like they've fasted for a
week or more and within 15 or 20 minutes
so yeah so these agents are really
remarkable and they shift the metabolism
to basically burn a different fuel so
your brain is like a hybrid engine it
can use glucose
and in periods of fasting it can use
ketone bodies after about a week about
60% of brain energy comes from ketones
so the technologies that we developed
basically put somebody into that state
very rapidly and it's giving the brain
an alternative energy that makes the
brain resilient against extreme
environments and can also have an
anti-inflammatory effect enhance certain
metabolic processes in the brain it can
also change the neuropharmacology of the
brain and what I mean by that is like we
have neurotransmitters in our brain like
glutamate and GABA serotonin dopamine
and other things we do know that the
being in a state of ketosis even
produced acutely with an exogenous
ketone can change the ratio of glutamate
to gaba
so gamma being hyper excitatory and many
neurodegenerative diseases are
pathophysiological linked to excess
glutamate production so glutamate is
excitatory and gaba is inhibitory but we
make gaba from glutamate with an enzyme
called glutamic acid decarboxylase so
the ketogenic diet and exotic is ketones
seem to activate this enzyme that take
that takes a neurotoxic neurotransmitter
when it's at high levels and converts
that into a brain stabilizing or
protective neurotransmitter or the
ratios of this so this is some of the
work that evolved out of our mouse
studies but actually other people have
shown this in mouse model I think in
humans too we just recapitulated it not
with a ketogenic diet but with a ketone
ester so this gives us kind of from a
fundamental standpoint you're changing
brain energy metabolism reducing
oxidative stress reducing inflammation
and changing bringing neuropharmacology
so this was early on in our experiments
that we were doing these things so I
realized it has major implications for
not just it has an implication for
everybody right so so that because I was
studying something that people could
read a paper or hear me talk it
is relevant to their lives whether
they're trying to lose weight control
blood glucose have more energy you know
most people notice someone with cancer
like it was maybe something that they
could use as an adjuvant or if
chemotherapy fails or something like
that so there became more public
interest and what I was doing and I took
advantage of outreach opportunities
because podcasts were I mean prior to
you know maybe 2010 or 11 I'd never even
heard happening but the more I did the
more opportunities came to me and the
more I took advantage of you know using
that platform to get our research out
and I think when you really packed I
wasn't as passionate about the drug
research or the compounds I was studying
even though I was fascinated you know I
would read paper after paper and would
be this compound what was going to be
remarkable it never really would live up
to its expectations and and an
experiment experimentally but the
ketogenic diet not only lived up to my
expectations it exceeded it in
everything that we studied the ketogenic
diet were exotic as ketones so that was
very exciting to me because I'm in a
pharmacology department I don't I don't
think it was very maybe my chair and and
maybe committees were very enthusiastic
of maybe one of their faculty is going
into put basically basing their whole
career on this high-fat diet you know so
but I knew it worked so I was very
passionate about it and I knew the
science was there it was it was very
marginalized and grossly underutilized
as a therapy for epilepsy and I felt
that it had a similar capacity maybe
even a greater capacity for other things
outside of seizures and epilepsy so then
I kind of embarked on many different
experiments to test and evaluate
nutrition in particular the ketogenic
diet and using nutritional ketosis as
medicine
and and that was a springboard how
specifically did the ketone esters
affect Navy divers so they have not well
they have not been used in Navy divers
in a registered clinical trial ok so
right now we have a registered clinical
trial with Duke and the protocol is
there are people in the field using it
and that communicate with me in various
capacities and they they measure blood
so they are sort of their own enema one
experiments but there are many and one
experiments going on and that feedback
has very very helpful for me to
understand what works what doesn't work
what maybe does not work optimal as far
as dosing and then I sort of apply that
to like our animal studies and our
animal studies that are published some
of that information helps us to develop
the clinical trials we have at Duke now
and the protocol for that is is very
[Music]
it's it's kind of simple in that they
just do a modified and sort of Atkins
diet Atkins like diet or modified
ketogenic diet that's pretty liberal and
I think most people in the fitness
community follow a similar ketogenic
diet type approach and the requirement
is that you just get ketones up 2.5
million molar and they they choose
people that are sort of in an age range
of the Navy SEALs I guess you could say
I have maybe more of an athletic
background so they're kind of surrogates
for the seals I guess you could say and
they do they measure everything from
cardiovascular AG brain activity they
put in arterial catheters to a mass spec
and they look at blood gases and Wow and
everything you think of and they're
inside probably the most advanced
hyperbaric system on the planet and
they're also submerged and they're also
playing a flight simulator and they're
peddling a bike at the same time so it's
a very it's a very complicated setup and
a very very cool experiment you could
only do these sorts of experiments at
Duke University
but they just put them on a ketogenic
diet for three days and they give a
supplement right before they get in and
it puts them into a mild state of
ketosis
like maybe a state that I'm in right now
mm-hmm but not a huge whopping dose of a
ketone Esther because they're not FDA
approved yet actually we're in the
process and I think maybe they are now
but and then in futures we can we can do
that for the particular type of ketone
Esther that prevents seizures so we're
working with that now so the studies
that are being done now with oxygen
toxicity are to basically replicate what
a diver would experience on a mission in
regards to the partial pressure of
oxygen that's being inhaled and so
they're inside a hyperbaric chamber and
they have a mask on and they have people
assisting them if they actually have a
seizure they push them to the edge of a
seizure and there's basically EEG
signatures that will tell you warn the
person looking at the data that an
impending seizure is about to happen and
that's when they cut off the experiment
Oh Mike I was amazed that something like
this got IRB approved but it is is a
registered clinical trial and clinical
trials.gov and and it's a testament to
Duke and their their staff
Bruce Derek is one and Richard moon and
Claude piano doe C these are all icons
in the field of military of dive
medicine you would say so if I tried to
do it it wouldn't get passed so they
have the expertise in the background and
decades of experience doing this kind of
research so that research is ongoing the
pilot study has been done and now 40
participants are going through this
protocol and then the next round what we
want to do is do sort of an extended
ketogenic diet because we do think
special operations guys we do think the
diet is feasible for special operations
people to follow maybe not the whole
general military but for Special Ops a
low-carb modified ketogenic diet is
feasible and now exogenous ketones are
palatable tolerable and efficacious for
elevating ketones so we have sort of two
technologies one being a specialized
diet and another being a specialized
supplement
that if consumed will protect the
individual likely better than
anticonvulsant drugs that we have and
not only would it protect them from
oxygen toxicity seizures which makes
diving safer we think it also has a
capacity after you were adapted to the
diet has the capacity to preserve
performance resilience so if you were at
you know one atmosphere on land and you
follow a ketogenic diet your performance
is probably not going to increase that
much so some people advocate that a
caged egg diet will enhance performance
under certain conditions in certain
types of athletes or a ketone ester who
will enhance performance I'm not totally
convinced of that data and I'm a
ketogenic diet researcher so I should be
biased so I think but I do think that
when you take an elite level warfighter
and put him into a situation where his
performance will be compromised and he's
in a state of nutritional ketosis that
his performance will be maintained in
that extreme environment we call that
performance resilience so we do research
with NASA on NASA extreme environment
Mission Operations where we live in a
hyperbaric habitat or we live in an
environment that's an extreme
environment and in in these cases we are
looking to basically maintain a level
performance or prevent a performance
decrement right so that's sort of the
idea here there's you go on social media
there's lots of discussion and chatter
and arguing about is the ketogenic diet
best for right strength athletes
bodybuilders elite level marathon
runners cyclist things like that that's
where most of the discussion is not so
much in the I think I'm glad I'm not
studying the ketogenic diet for sports
performance it's kind of interesting and
I keep up on it and I contribute even to
some papers but I think they're real the
low-hanging fruit of benefits of the
ketogenic diet are for people who really
need it like people that are overweight
people with type 2 diabetes people have
seizures of course and then also the
warfighter who's subjecting themselves
to
particular extreme environments where we
know the diet can be followed in his
operational setting and we know from
animal data and emerging human data and
that it would be beneficial in that
environment so where did this diet the
ketogenic diet originate from like when
did when did humans start eating this
way yeah well it depends on who you ask
but okay but we knew that you know going
back from scriptural times I think you
know the Gospel of Mark talks about
fasting and seizures right so fasting
produces a state of ketosis
that's therapeutic fasting hmm or
starvation ketosis or fasting ketosis so
that we knew for millennia that fasting
had an anti-seizure effect and
Hippocrates talked about you know food
is medicine and also knew about fasting
it seizures but it really went some
people will argue that huge a diet came
at this point but it really the Mayo
Clinic in the 1920s 20 21 22 or Wilder
and colleagues really they understood
that fasting produced these ketone
bodies in the blood and that if you took
a diet and gave almost pure fat with
just a little bit of protein so enough
protein to prevent protein malnutrition
and the patient ate that diet their
their corresponding hormones like
insulin and biomarkers or
blood metabolites like glucose and and
most importantly its ketone bodies were
shifted in a direction that looked like
fasting even though it was you caloric
which means you can't fast you can only
fast for so long you know to control
your seizure but if you follow a
ketogenic diet you're getting all the
calories that you need for energy and
enough protein to maintain body tissues
and function and to prevent protein
starvation we do not need carbohydrates
there's essential amino acids from
protein and essential fatty acids from
fats there's no essential sugars
carbohydrates so we could eat a diet
that's completely eliminates
carbohydrate
and feed that diet with a macronutrient
ratio which means fat - protein - carbs
carbs being almost non-existent and
maintain the patient on that and they
would sort of it mimics the the effects
of fasting it's much different than
fasting well it's different than fasting
but it shared many of the metabolic
physiological and neuro chemical effects
of fasting you know the anti-seizure
effects fasting so that was in 1920s and
then the diet was actually used as in
epilepsy therapy until about the 1960s
late 50s to 1960s and anti-seizure drugs
came along and they kind of dominated
epilepsy or seizure therapies and for
quite a while but they never really
worked that well they do there's about a
third of patients who just don't respond
at all they just end the patients that
do respond and still get a lot of side
effects in some cases the drugs are
remarkably well some people will say you
know be advocates of the some people who
are advocates of the ketogenic diet will
say the drugs don't work at all and
that's not the case because I meet
people where the drugs are really
life-saving to them but I also meet
people like Mike dancer who I connected
with if you just look up Mike dancer in
epilepsy you'll find his remarkable
story of you know a dozen or half dozen
or more medications that failed and the
ketogenic diet was really the only thing
that controlled his seizures and you run
into a lot of people like this and this
story that probably dominates is a story
of Jim Abraham's son Charlie Abraham's
Charlie had was on a half a dozen
different medications for drug resistant
seizures and his father Jim took it upon
himself to educate himself about the
ketogenic diet and going to the library
of all things and showing his doctor
telling his telling Charlie's doctor
that he needed to be on this diet but he
faced resistance because the doctor did
not even want to put his son you know
this doctors patient on the ketogenic
diet because they thought it was going
to be too difficult to fall
and the doctor probably just didn't know
enough about it but even though it was
the standard of care so essentially he
switched doctors Charlie got treated at
Johns Hopkins I believe and within a
very short amount of time it controlled
his seizures to the point where Charlie
could be weaned off the diet over a year
or two and the story was so remarkable
it made Dateline NBC and I saw that back
and maybe 1996 or something and Jim
Abrams is was friends with Meryl Streep
so Meryl Streep did a movie about the
ketogenic diet called first do no harm
and it was the Charlie Foundation and
this movie first do no harm which really
got me motivated
I sent like all these links to my
program manager at the time and it was I
connected with the leading scientists
including dr. Jung row who was at the
Barrow Neurological Institute at the
time treating patients and also doing
science so it was a combination of
things in the media personal stories
people that I knew and I think most
importantly I mean there was really
solid PubMed you know peer-reviewed
academic research supporting this
therapy it was working as an
anti-seizure effect because it made the
brain work better so I knew it had
implications for other things but nobody
else was really looking at these other
things so actually one of the first
experiments that we did was actually a
mouse model of Alzheimer's disease we
started the intervention the ketogenic
diet intervention kind of after these
money sort of have the the Alzheimer's
pathology which is these amyloid plaques
toxic plaques form and once that happens
it's hard to reverse but our studies did
not show it was therapeutic in the realm
of preventing Alzheimer's disease
because these mouse models really are
not very well suited to study the
disease but we did see an increase in
motor performance so they would run
faster and farther on like a treadmill
device we call rotary so that was very
interesting and then but other people
have published including NIH showing
that the ketogenic
diet and most researchers on a keto
nester delayed the progression of these
amyloid and tau plaques which are the
hallmark characteristic of Alzheimer's
disease but I believe they stay got
ketone levels higher and they started
the intervention a little bit early so
the take-home message is that if you
have a you know predisposed to
Alzheimer's disease you want to it would
be prudent to start the intervention
early and that could be a diet that
could be supplementation
what is the plaque that you mentioned
and and how does that plaque bring on
Alzheimer's yeah yeah this is like
there's amyloid beta plaques and tau
plaques and the the etiology of this
Tawaf a--they or amyloid plaque
accumulation the reason for it happening
is a academic question that has not been
sufficiently answered yeah okay
and it's very ambiguous how these these
things develop but you only have
Alzheimer's disease Alzheimer's disease
is defined more or less postmortem
by the by showing when you open up you
know dissect the brain and find these
plaques there are new technologies that
are emerging that are essentially
positron emission tomography or PET
scans that can scan for amyloid and tau
and so we have technologies now that can
actually image the presence of these
plaques and the the progression of the
the plaques over time with different
therapies so this is this is relatively
new and but some Institute's are doing
this so it is not really understood
genetically there are molecular things
that are being turned on that accumulate
these that cause the body to form these
toxic plaques but the the question is
why does the body produce these plaques
at all right right I think I think it's
and this is controversial but these
amyloid and tau plaques are produced in
response to inflammation in the brain
and also at
root of that could be a dysregulation of
metabolic control so another hallmark
characteristic of Alzheimer's disease is
a decrease in glucose metabolism so in
fdg-pet scan which looks at glucose
metabolism the brain is very dim in
patients who have Alzheimer's disease
relative to a normal subject the image
is much brighter which is indicative of
the brain using high levels of glucose
for energy a hallmark characteristic for
Alzheimer's is glucose hypometabolism
you need a robust metabolic activity to
deal with a number of processes in the
brain including dealing with processing
the amyloid plaques and Alzheimer's and
you know the body needs to get rid of
them through a series of enzymatic
reactions and things that are cleaved
and the glymphatic system the brain has
a limited so which you know activates at
night time when we sleep so there's a
lot of things that we're learning now
that could be the root cause of it so
it's the disability to burn the you're
you're producing too much plaque or
you're not breaking it down all sort of
being recycled but there's some of them
that amyloid plaques have antimicrobial
effects so if you were to have a viral
illness like you know is things simple
that like herpes simplex or HIV or a
virus corona virus yeah or yeah that's a
hot topic yeah
Lyme disease like things like that so
there are there's evidence that Lyme
disease that Alzheimer's pathology could
be a result of having a microbial
pre-existing microbial infection and it
could be viral
it could be bacterial but it's the it's
causing neuro inflammation neuro
inflammation is causing metabolic
dysregulation and inner and the
accumulation of these toxic plaques and
you can also be there's genetically you
could be predisposed we have different
if you're an ape OE for apoe4 for
that genotype will make it more likely
that you'll have Alzheimer's disease and
if you reach to age of like 75 or 80
there's there's a pretty high
probability that you'll have Alzheimers
disease if you are genetically
predisposed and have the a bowi okay
genotype able you for or for for yeah I
mean it makes so much sense as far as
like evolution goes and animals go I
like going back to what you said about
physical performance if you think of
like an animal who hasn't eaten in two
weeks right it has to have that extra
boost of energy to be able to catch its
prey and to eat and and you know having
those ketone bodies I guess in their
blood really yeah does affect them that
way well if I guess put it another way
like if an animal is in a starvation
State Ryan could not readily use ketone
body it's for fuel or be able to
function you know from a cognitive or
mental you know point of view or a
physical point of view in a mildly
hypoglycemic State and not have robust
access to its body fat and then the
ketones that are produced from that they
would not be able to forage and catch
their prey you know so they would not
survive so they would not evolution
would not favor individuals animals that
did not keto adapt we say right every
time so I think there's a pretty big
component to that but I think our modern
lifestyle the foods we eat are maybe
lack of activity mm-hmm prevent us from
having limited food availability so we
essentially silence that that that gene
program that would otherwise be
activated in the face of short-term
fasting or long term fasting so when we
fast not only does it completely change
our metabolic physiology it changes our
brain chemistry the neuropharmacology of
the brain but it also activates genes so
we say it has an epigenetic effect and
we have pretty good evidence now that
once that those gene pathways are
activated it can
enhance kita lytic enzymes which you
know are enzymes that allow ketones to
be used as energy ketogenic enzymes
enzymes in the liver that can allow a
robust production of ketones under
certain states and then the transport of
these ketone bodies which are through
these things called the mono carboxylic
acid transporters like the transporter
proteins get up regulated pretty
robustly when you fast a person when you
put them on a ketogenic diet and then if
they go off the diet completely and then
go back on again they are much they
entrance to state of ketosis as much
much faster and so there's some animal
data that suggests that and of course
data in people so the more you do it the
easier it gets and maybe the more
benefits you derive from it too and I
think that is supported in the
literature now and also you know and it
kind of lends to this idea of metabolic
flexibility so if we're on a
carbohydrate based eating program and
we're eating carbohydrates continuously
throughout the day with small meals and
we never restrict it then we never are
making our body flexible to using other
types of macro nutrients so one things
about one thing about humans is that we
are remarkably adaptable and we are true
omnivores whether you believe in the
carnivore diet or the vegan diet
plant-based diet I think the truth is
that humans have evolved and survived
and do so well because of their
omnivorous capacity and we do we can do
fine off eating meat and meat only but
is it optimal I don't think so
we could do we can live and survive off
eating a vegan diet is it optimal I
don't think so okay so the optimal diet
is is the omnivore diet so whether both
sides want to agree to that or not right
it's a hot topic people need that you've
dedicated your life to it so yeah you
know I've actually dedicated my life to
a diet that's pretty radical metabolic
therapy a clinical therapy so the
ketogenic diet is very extreme and I
don't think it's it may for some people
it may be optimal obviously if you have
or emblem right or something like that
but is it optimal for the athlete is it
optimal I admit I followed the diet but
I every day I eat dark chocolate and
blueberries and probably some greens and
broccoli every day too so it's not it's
not a version of a ketogenic diet that
and a person with epilepsy would follow
although are the science is evolving to
the point where the classical ketogenic
diet our understanding of it is being
[Music]
that it's maybe it was too restrictive
and that a more modified or more liberal
forms of the diet may be actually better
it definitely better for adults but in
the pediatric population it's always
prudent to start them on a on a
classical ketogenic diet with almost 90%
fat and then see how they react and then
maybe be a little bit more liberal and
transition them to kind of a diet that
I'm following okay you can also
incorporate different types of fats like
coconut oil or medium chain triglyceride
oil and perhaps even exhaust ketones but
that's still in a state of being studied
now that the introduction of those types
of fats and supplements could make it
possible that a much more liberal diet
could be followed and still maintain
therapeutic ketosis which would be have
an anti seizure
your protective effects so I'm that's
that's like sort of my wheelhouse so
that's what I'm very interested in doing
because this therapy the benefits of the
ketogenic diet are not very accessible
to people because they they don't want
to exclude an entire macronutrient from
their diet which would be carbohydrates
so I think there are true benefits to
some of these plant-based foods like you
know chocolate blueberries coffee
arugula broccoli things like that
there's definitely some real benefits to
eating these foods and I think that
excluding them is not a great idea
especially for following it for the
duration of your life and some people
have to do that for their disorder so
we're trying to work and engineer diets
that would be feasible for someone to
follow but their feasibility
their efficacy may only be they may only
be efficacious when ketogenic fats and
ketone supplements are also incorporated
into the diet and we think of those
things as food like exogenous ketone at
ketone ester is a calorie containing
molecule that is kind of uni it's like a
fourth macronutrient but it can be
incorporated into the food and make that
ketogenic diet more efficacious it can
augment the therapeutic potential of
their diet in different ways so this is
an area that I study and that we are
doing research on that what are you so
what do you believe the optimal diet is
for just the average person who may not
be a professional athlete you know maybe
goes to the gym a couple days a week it
has a desk job or has just a normal 9:00
to 5:00 what would you what would you
what is your opinion on on the optimal
diet for for that kind of person
yeah well the diet that's non optimal is
probably like the majority of people
after a certain age eat too many
calories right and surplus calories will
result in sort of metabolic derangement
and type-2 diabetes and just being
overweight so we are more likely to eat
surplus calories if it comes from
processed carbohydrates and a
combination of sugar and fat right so
sugar and fat are two things that you
want to limit in your diet the
combination of the two but fashion yeah
the combination like salt sugar and fat
but a ketogenic diet is extremely high
in fat and if you if a ketogenic diet is
by definition devoid of carbohydrates
it's the carbohydrates that can spike
the insulin and kick you outta ketosis
that makes the benefits of a ketogenic
diet it negates it so if you're on a
ketogenic diet and you have you follow
the ketogenic diet perfectly but have
you know a couple pieces of candy a day
you're not going to be getting the
benefits of the diet from a neurological
standpoint at least from an anti-seizure
sampling
as a child could eat one piece of candy
and have a seizure and this has been
shown many times so it kicks you out of
ketosis and then you your brain goes
right back into activates your brain in
a way that triggers a seizure we don't
know exactly why this happens okay
[Music]
but it depends on the individual I guess
is my point is that if you're trying to
lose weight a diet that is formulated
and that could be a vegan diet it could
be I don't think it's optimal or it
could be a carnivore diet but I think
the optimal diet for if we're just going
to make a blanket statement is a low
carbohydrate diet that's low in
carbohydrates but is sufficient enough
in plants that you're getting
phytonutrients and fiber
I do believe in fiber early man had
sometimes 100 150 200 grams of fiber in
their diet if you look at it depends on
the period - if you look back in history
but having studied I did study the
evolution of human diet through college
and read a number of books on it and one
thing that was like really apparent is
that a lot of fiber was he hmm but you
know a an optimal diet would be devoid
of processed carbohydrates and sugars
and sufficient in protein from fatty
cuts of beef fish poultry the beef
ideally not everybody can afford it but
from pasture raised grass-fed animals
okay I think that's obviously much
better for the environment
[Music]
concentrated feedlot operations are very
destructive to the environment and when
you're you you make a statement when you
buy your food if you're supporting this
kind of Agriculture I do believe that
GMO foods can be destructive to having
come from a farming background we are
farmers - we have had to feed the cows
in the morning and get their money so
it's been a lot of time with on the farm
and feeding counted before coming here
today
no their proper ways to farm and
improper ways to farm so I think when
you purchase your food you're kind of
making a statement but also you're
choosing a type of food that's inferior
if you're going in the direction of you
know your food from factory farms so
that's one consideration there's a lot
people put a lot of time and effort
looking into the subject that's all I'm
gonna say about it for now but I think
that the macronutrient can't the
macronutrients are most important in
regards to just like human nutrition
right so I'm a believer in a higher
protein diet
anywhere from I think fifteen ten to
fifteen percent is or fifteen percent is
like what the what's recommended by the
USDA or a DEA and I'm kind of more along
the lines of you know twenty to thirty
percent and with the balance being fifty
to seventy percent of my calories from
fat just because I do ketogenic diet
research and then follow the ketogenic
diet and I do get probably anywhere from
five to fifteen percent of my calories
from carbohydrates and I can stay in
ketosis with that level of carbohydrate
consumption especially if I'm
incorporating ketogenic fats or I'm
pretty active and I have a lot of blood
work to back up that that is that's
working for me right you know different
yeah if you look at my blood work now
you know forty five ish and if I go back
to I'm twenty five my blood work at
forty five is much better when I really
went e5 I was probably getting about
three hundred grams of carbs a day three
v not like crazy amounts but I was
eating a lot more food too right so
that's a big part of it and the reason
the ketogenic diet works remarkably well
for losing weight and weight maintenance
a lot of people can lose weight but not
a lot of people can follow an eating
program that maintains that weight loss
and I think occassion diet can do that
remarkably well by
maybe some may argue is that it's it's
unpalatable so you're just less likely
to eat more right if you're excluding
carbohydrates but it has an appetite
suppressing effect so it's pretty clear
in the literature so so that's one
reason the QT I said most of the people
who are interested in the ketogenic diet
are interested in its weight loss
effects right so I think people need to
know that it's not a magic diet
I think dr. Atkins advocated that there
was a metabolic advantage that
suppressing the hormone insulin can
allow you to eat actually more calories
and you're burning more calories I don't
think the science support that it some
evidence there may be some evidence that
that's true but it's very negligible the
big effects of the ketogenic diet for
weight loss really come down to its
ability to to produce inadvertently
calorie restriction and allow people and
you're getting the benefits of ketones
too which after you adapt to the diet
you feel more lucid you have more energy
yeah over time but you feel crappy the
first month typically that's the keto
flu right that people typically get yeah
I don't I never really had that and I
think maybe athletes especially elite
level not that I'm definitely not low
athlete but I did go through periods
where I would go through calorie
restriction and then calorie surplus and
stuff when I was tinkering more.we
weightlifting stuff but uh but I think
that athletes enter something called
post exercise ketosis so if they go out
on a bike for four to six hours they
burn up all their glycogen they tap into
their fat they come back they're in a
state of ketosis even though they're
needing you know three four hundred
grams of carbohydrates a day you know
they can enter that state so it's you
know this is a phenomena and so I think
they are just by definition more
metabolically flexible so when they
follow the ketogenic diet right many of
them do quite well and don't have a keto
flu keto flu is probably also due to
electrolyte imbalances or diuretic
effect my own diuretic effect or a
hyponatremic effect you excrete excess
sodium things like that
magnesium maybe a little bit low - mine
was a little bit low and probably the
only supplement that I take forward the
Q genic diet is a magnesium supplement
now I don't think I need it now because
I think I've adjusted my diet but it
just it's something that was a little
bit below normal at a point in time I
was probably not putting my diet
together well and that strike me as kind
of odd and explained some of the cramps
I was getting which is a potential side
effect the dqj diet and I've always used
magnesium at nighttime so can you walk
me through what your day looks like as
far as what you eat and like for
breakfast lunch dinner and can you also
give me kind of a a beginner's grocery
list for someone that wants to get
started and that someone who's really
interested in the keto diet
yeah well today I didn't eat anything so
okay yesterday did if we use yesterday
as an example or maybe tomorrow I'm
trying to get my schedule tomorrow but
about two or three days a week I do
intermittent fasting and that's a
subject we didn't really talk about but
intermittent fasting is something a lot
of people are doing and it's eating
within a predetermined window also
called time restricted eating so you
could eat within an eight-hour window
say from 12 noon to 8 p.m. and then
nothing after that time or before that
time that pushes your body into a mild
state of ketosis and if you're on a
ketogenic diet since you've already
adapted to using fat and ketones for
fuel it's easier to follow intermittent
fasting yep so today I am doing
intermittent fasting and my meal will
prop my first meal will probably be
about 2 p.m. in the afternoon and in my
bag I have Wild Planet sardines and I
have Wild Planet sardines and maybe
we'll go out and like have a salad
somewhere and I'll probably put that
like on the salad I'm so feeling like my
first meal kind of at the day but
yesterday it was we have chicken sausage
and we have eggs I think I had like
sausage and eggs for breakfast but my
food list I kind of wrote down sort of
what my wife does shopping but like
fatty cuts of meat poultry and we get
like the whole chicken usually with a
bone
really so my wife's Hungarian and she
introduced me which is pretty big in the
carnivore crowd is eating organ meats so
all the organs so mostly we hearts and
livers and that's a big staple in our
diet so a lot of heart a lot of liver a
lot
beef tallow like beef fat we'll use that
for different things will make stews I
get most of our beef actually through
butcher box which is an online service
and you just order it you subscribe to
it and res comes to grass-fed
grass-finished yeah butcher box meats
the other company that has superior meat
is us wellness meats their products are
very good too and they also have like
organ meats that you can buy they have
like you can get ground heart make like
heart burgers it's ground up with like
beef fat and things like that so that
and fish a lot of fatty fish like
sardines like I said will be my next
meal we'll get a delicious by the way I
tried them recently after hearing the
Tim Ferriss yeah what Wild Planet has so
they reached out and cut and sent me
sort of I didn't know that they have
like all these different fish varieties
so Wild Planet actually has all
different types of sardines that you can
go and they have all many different
types of tuna fish too in cans and
packets and they also have chicken and
they're super big on sustainability so
they've done their homework in regards
to sort of regenerative farming for fish
and sustainability so I feel good
supporting them purchasing their
products butcher box you guys wellness
meats are sort of where we get a lot of
our food from we go to the local butcher
too and get like big bones for the dogs
and okay ground me and stumbling that
occasionally we feed our dogs what we
eat sour cream something I have every
night to fill basically to get in extra
calories so at the end of the day I'm
usually calorie deficient
just because my days are pretty busy I
make like a chocolate mousse at night
using coconut cream
sour cream and dark chocolate bacon
cocoa but now I have different powders
that are like collagen powder like
chocolate collagen powder that's like
lightly sweetened with stevia
I like throw scoop of that in with sour
cream and blueberries and something
really simple like every night's like a
different recipe but notice what I had
last night and I'll stir that up and
it'll be probably like 70 grams of fat
just from the sour cream and then a
scoop or two of chocolate collagen with
wild blueberries so I get a couple
different companies sell wild
blueberries and I buy those that and
salad greens olive oil MCT oil you know
butter grass-fed butter what about the
coffee what's your what's your coffee
cocktail what do you put in your coffee
yeah so today well I'm drinking I'm not
advertising for them but a parody coffee
like coffee be thy medicine it's really
good coffee and I'm not trying to
advertise with it but uh but I have you
know I people send me different coffees
that I like to try so I typically I have
a French press and I make about almost a
liter of coffee in the morning not super
strong I'm not super weak just kind of
and I have one cup and then I pour the
rest in this and then I typically finish
this before noon and I tried to get no
caffeine definitely no caffeine after
like 2 p.m. but usually try to cap my
caffeine by 12 noon because I'm really
big in the sleep sleep hygiene sleep I
monitor these things part of what we
studies I sold on your Instagram a lot
of times I don't put anything in my
coffee but there's a particular product
out that's really good it's called
momento it's really marketed towards
cognitive function and Alzheimer's
disease and it's got everything from MCT
to theanine two versions of choline that
can enhance the seat of acetylcholine
acetylcholine nergic function so I've
been putting one serving of that in
there so it supplies some MCTS which
but it's not a whole lot of calories so
this that's the only sort of calories
that I had in my coffee today so I've
been because we've been really busy and
working on the farm and everything a
little bit less sleep than normal and I
noticed when I have that the I do notice
this particular supplement is sort of
giving me the caffeine and the theanine
team seems to take the jitters off of
the extra caffeine didn't you know get
in the morning okay
so that's what I've had today so the M
so the MCT and the butter yeah I don't
always use butter like I don't have
butter in this because it has a blend of
essential fats DHE DHA epa MCT again the
company is called momento right and it's
a new product that I'm trying I met them
at the metabolic health summit which is
and encourage your listeners to go to
the metabolic health summit if they're
interested in anything that I'm doing
it's like a top tier you know academic
clinical and also entertainment we had
JP Sears there oh wow yeah so he was our
entertainment for the gala it's an
amazing event but memento was they had a
booth there and it was the first time
I'd heard I knew it was coming out and I
had two samples of it and I've been
using it and I love the product so only
about 20% of the things I actually try
do I like say something like this okay
so you try a lot of stuff I do I have a
lot of stuff that I still need to try a
lot of things I shelf but yeah I love to
try products I do a lot of testing on
myself you know and we have various
technologies where we can look at things
like reaction time and like decision
making yeah there are things that were
experiments that we were putting
together for the next nation' NASA NEEMO
mission and also hi-seas mission which
would be in Hawaii so we're gearing up
to do to study a lot of things as far as
performance wise on those missions and
so it'd be kind of fun to ya test myself
oh yeah I remember you mentioned
something about you spent like 10 days
underwater for some sort of study was
that a NASA study or yeah so nASA has
[Music]
to prepare astronauts for space you know
they have what they call space analog
missions and there's about fourteen
space analog missions and the mission
the only mission that I know of actually
uses astronauts is the NASA extreme
environment Mission Operations and this
I was on mission my colleague Don Carney
agus was on mission 21
Nemo 21 and I had the amazing
opportunity to be on Nemo 22 and my wife
was on mission 23 actually so like super
lucky that's crazy
and she ran a lot of the science my wife
did on mission 22 and when I was
underwater so they pair you up with a
crew and typically they have a couple
astronauts on there my commander was
shell Lindgren and he's been on the
space station about a half a year and
also peg pedro dequeue who is now the
science minister of spain but he he flew
with John Glenn I think in 95 so he was
a very accomplished ISA astronaut and
then the NASA astronaut was Joe and he
was also a medical doctor and and also
Trevor Graff who's sort of a planetary
biologists geologist at NASA so that was
the three crewmembers and then there's
two habitat Tech's who just makes sure
we're safe when we do our eb a's when we
go outside of the habitat so we live in
saturation in this you know if you're a
scuba diver you know you can only go
down for so long right where you get a
bends or yeah that's a matron narcosis
if you go down to or you get dcs or the
bends decompression sickness so we we
kind of throw out the tables right when
you're in saturation and you dive down
there and you stay down there and you
cannot come up you know if you come up
mid mission you'll die a very painful
death right right right so you live down
there for we live for ten days each
mission is a little bit different some I
think my wife's was nine days some are
14 days some are seven days so but what
NASA holds these missions to basically
vet out procedures technologies
[Music]
you know different things that are can
be used for deep-space missions right
the idea is to look at crew dynamics to
look at different widgets you know that
monitor sleep that monitor
cardiovascular function that monitor
exercise devices will test down there
we had a device to rescue an astronaut
who's been incapacitated and we live
inside the habitat but during the day we
go outside of the habitat and that's
called an extra vehicular activity or an
EVs and then we'll have a whole list of
tasks to do that could take anywhere
from four to six hours so we are in a
suit we maintain you know we're living
in the saturation state and and
everything is done you know pretty much
how it would be if you're living on Mars
or how they envisioned it would be
there's this thing called playbook so
everything is organized from day one
what you're doing what the next guy is
doing everything is very organized the
safety and the crew at the Mission
Control that's run by FIU on so there's
like Mission Control and there's a lot
of scientists and engineers that are on
mainland and we're out in the Atlantic
at the bottom of the Atlantic a couple
miles out but Mission Control really
calls all the shots so we have
communications all the time you know
telling us what to do and we have a
pretty demanding schedule from the time
we wake up you know they give you like
two hours of personal time at the end
but that's really just preparing for the
next day okay so it's probably one of
the most it was probably the most
amazing experience of my life being able
to do this and be among those people who
are such high achievers and operating at
such a high level I was able to learn
from them you know up my game I mean
consumer I'll have to do the same thing
you know my first task was using the
mini DNA analyzer and sequencer when I
got down there and it broke when I was
using it my device didn't so they had to
like bring another device down so I was
starting like a couple hours late and
that screwed up the guy who is coming
after me so it was like you're put into
the stress environment but stress is one
thing that we measure right we do
salivary cortisol we
we're monitoring systems a polar be 800
chest strap at nighttime looks at things
like heart rate variability our sleep so
and my wife is interested in looking at
like crew dynamics and what they call
cognitive or team team cognition mmm so
the group functions together as sort of
a team there's certain dynamics and when
stress when things break down and when
things just go awry that can influence
team cognition so when things go bad and
things break or you know when within a
reason you know you don't want someone
to get injured but some people have like
little cuts and bruises and little
things like that it stresses the team
out and but the behavioral scientists
people or the people who study stress
then that day becomes more interesting
to them if something goes wrong because
they can collect all the sound bytes of
the communication they can look at the
HRV they can look at salivary cortisol
so a bad day for the crew when things go
wrong it becomes an interesting day for
the behavioral neuroscientist I mean
there's so many teams working on this
most of them from NASA some from ISA and
some from outside Institute's like
universities at Florida which we operate
through actually I did it sort of as
more or less took vacation time to do it
because sort of like an independent
thing that we that we were doing outside
of the university but we want to where
we think that the Aquarius habitat is
where the NASA these space analog
missions happen is an amazing
opportunity for someone like the office
of Navy research or nav C or the
Department of Defense to do research in
this habitat because it simulates sort
of the life that a person on a submarine
would have or it you can simulate
saturation diving which is super
important commercially right there's so
many things that you could study
scientifically in this environment we
think that the federal government would
be interested in funding you know other
academic projects on that so oh yeah so
I did it I did as you know as a crew
member on this space analog mission sort
of independent for my university but
we are sort of gearing up to hopefully
compete for funding from like ARPA DoD
Office of Naval Research nav see we
think that these types of missions that
could be independent from NASA and on
their own really offer a lot to federal
agencies to understand these extreme
environments for the warfighter yeah for
the astronaut for the commercial diver
things like that
so we plan to do a lot more missions
undersea that's incredible that's fine
yeah thank you very fortunate to be able
to do it long term fasting yeah how
often do you do long-term fasts like
over like three days or more and maybe
that's not the amount of time you do it
for basically how often do you do them
and how many days do you do them for and
can you explain someone like the
benefits like we're a little low hanging
fruit per se benefits to to a human to
practice these kind of fasts yeah for
fasting well I became interested in
fasting because of the work that George
Cahill did at Harvard Medical School
where he fasted subjects for 40 days and
this was published and I kind of delved
in and read everything I could and that
was sort of my introduction probably
going back to 2008 like reading this
paper and then a big review was written
about him in 2006 which I was aware of
but didn't really read it thoroughly
until 2008 then it became apparent to me
that once your body is after about three
days I mean your your brain is basically
your body's just cranking on ketones so
which is being released from your fat
stores so your fat gets into your blood
it goes to your liver your brain can't
really use the faster fuel so it
converts from the ketones and there's a
gradual shift from glucose to ketones so
I became very interested in in doing it
myself and it was probably about again
about 10 years ago after reading this
that I decided to fast for seven days
and I've never fasted that long since
but I have done a lot of three-day fasts
especially when I'm traveling if I'm by
myself my wife and I like to sit down to
dinner every night and how that so
sometimes you know I do the intermittent
fasting
today only typically when I'm by myself
or doing some kind of experiment why do
three or four days and sometimes if I'm
sick too if I feel something coming on
I'll fast and go I never get sick really
so I believe you know fasting can
rejuvenate the immune system 70% or more
of your immune systems kind of in your
gut and a lot of immune system energy is
spent dealing with the stuff that we're
eating right so especially if you have
leaky gut so you're eating food and say
your guts not in the best health right
the tight junctions that hold the
epithelial cells together and your gut
and they become loose or whatever you're
letting small particles and things get
into your bloodstream that otherwise
would not be there and your immune
system has to work they recognize these
these things as antigens so your immune
system is working hard to neutralize
some of these antigens right when you're
fasting your immune system is like it's
like looking for something to do right
so it's like hanging out so if you have
a little bug or virus or something then
it becomes more vigilant to basically
deal with that so that's how I think of
it okay now but after I've been delving
into like how does fasting affecting
music so the way I envision it and I'm
not an immunologist but it's very
apparent that you know food it puts
massive demands especially if your gut
health is not optimal on your means even
if you have optimal gut health and
everything a lot of time and energy is
spent a lot of a lot of immunological
resources are spent dealing you know
with food so fasting is a way to sort of
regenerate the immune system it
stimulates things like otology right
which could be beneficial calorie
restriction could sort of do the same
thing but fasting does it sort of in a
hyper activated state so it can improve
your metabolic health it can lower you
know insulin lower blood glucose elevate
ketones which can be beneficial fasting
can be a way of sort of just maintaining
your calories like through intermittent
fasting but long-term fasting really
puts the body into a state of stress and
the hormetic response or adapter
response to that stress is where we get
the benefits you know you might feel
good when you're fasting you might have
a headache it might feel crummy but
after if people stick with it after
about the third or fourth the day you
start feeling almost normal it's a
little bit scary and and actually at the
seventh day I felt fine I just felt my
energies were kind of low
I felt a little bit cold like you know
the a/c was too cold like my metabolism
was shutting down but it was still clear
I was writing grants and actually the
work that I did during that time that
grant ended up getting funded and I
think I got a couple manuscripts out
during the Wow that I didn't eat
anything you know did I taught classes
and stuff too did I hear correctly that
you dead lifted an absurd amount of
weight after like a seven day fast yeah
that was on the seventh day yeah I think
I'd taught in the morning and I did some
like fitness camp later in the day
and that night you know I knew I was
like well let me work out I had done
some light workouts or just like chin
ups and push ups throughout because I do
think it's important to do resistance
training if you're fasting you know
maintain muscle but if you do something
too strenuous right you're accelerating
catabolic processes and you don't want
to necessarily do that but I did find it
very interesting as a litmus test for my
strength strength deadlifts were pretty
good litmus test for that and and I was
kind of cautious not to go too crazy
because I didn't want to break form and
get injured at the at the end of this
definitely like really bad like don't
but you know as you're warming up you
have an idea of how much you know so
it's like 135 225 and 315 and then 405
felt really easy and then so I did like
five plates and the collars and stuff so
I was about 500 pounds and yeah I did
that for ten I just kind of stopped at
ten and I didn't you know really feel I
didn't even get sore the next day or
anything like that but I can typically
do more but as I didn't push myself so
maybe I could do 585 at that time for
about 10 so did Wow 95 or 500 pounds I
usually do like six plates for ten but
at five players per ton and it was not
hard it was about how it normally feels
okay so that that was kind of if I was
to do it again I would take something
like creatine monohydrate I would
probably that's like a supplement
you know that can help with with
training I would probably take I did
take electrolytes but I do plan to do it
again I just need to time it right you
know with I don't I feel like I'm master
sizing my wife I'm not eating dinner I'm
like that more of a social thing I think
when I was doing it before I would just
like have tea like green tea in the
morning I tried to cut back on my
caffeine yeah that's one of my important
question I really had for you was during
those long term fast what do you you can
do you have tea do you drink what
specific things do you consume yeah
beef bouillon cubes I had those I would
make I would just boil some water and
throw it one in and that was actually
like pretty satiating I would look
forward to that but I would I would have
half of my normal cup of coffee because
I didn't want to Jack myself up on
caffeine but I didn't want to eliminate
it because that was part of I'm
habituated to caffeine you know whether
you like it or not that's I think we all
are I we wake up and have our first cup
of coffee to basically deal with the
caffeine withdrawal side effects yeah
when I first started training I used
caffeine like twice a week and the
effects were pretty big but I didn't
want to completely get off of it and
then start caffeine again so I just did
less of it with green tea in the
afternoon but it's all I had
minerals electrolytes um beef bouillon
and I felt fine I think the third day
was the hardest but after that it was
pretty easy and I encourage people to do
it especially if they have any kind of
you know hereditary you know
predisposition for cancer Alzheimer's
disease or type 2 diabetes things like
that and they mean it also it's more
there's physiological effects that are
beneficial there are you know
psychological effects and and there's
just kind of like behavioral effects
right I was writing down somewhere oh
not on this but I was just kind of
writing down all the benefits of fasting
and there's really a lot yeah I noticed
I've done two seven-day fasts in my life
the first one I did was the beginning of
2019 the second one I did was just at
this past January the first time I did
it
played a an hour game of basketball and
it was on the third day I believe huh
and I normally get extremely fatigued
after about 15 minutes I can get that
like a side stitch cramp you know what I
mean I had to stop take a couple couple
breaths drink some water and I noticed
after thirty minutes of playing I had
literal literally zero fatigue
I felt like Terminator you know what I
mean I feel like I could go forever
another thing is I went to the gym and I
was able to do about three times as many
pull-ups as I normally can Wow I can't I
couldn't laugh and I was that was before
I would ever learned about you before I
hadn't listened to any talks on it I
didn't know what ki ketosis was this was
last year in 2019 and I just literally I
was explaining this to people and I
could not wrap my brain around how I was
able to to do so many pull-ups and play
basketball for so long with zero fatigue
yeah that just kind of explains it
yeah bodyweight exercises - I didn't
push myself to the edge but I think I
would jump up and do like 20 Chin's like
outside our house or whatever like on a
tree yeah and I didn't want to push it
but that those 20 reps which would like
fairly strict chin-ups felt pretty easy
like if I go I can do about 36 or 37
chips or something like that Wow but the
20 just felt really easy and you can
make them a little bit harder you can
kind of like stretch the lats at the
bottom and then contract at the top and
towards the end of it it was like trying
to make the chin-ups harder so do the 20
but like super strict right and tracked
and I knew I didn't want to sort of
stress out the body too much because you
know I was worried that you know fasting
but I probably didn't need to worry but
yeah but yeah when I do a big lift
I don't fast seven days but I do like to
go into it relatively fast it and I feel
that if my body is not dealing with
digesting assimilating mechanically you
know to enzymatically it's not dealing
with a meal that I have more energy and
resources to activate muscle and I feel
my feeling intuitively is that my
central nervous system can activate
the muscle better it's it's almost like
those pathways neurological pathways are
activated when I'm in a semi fasted
State I think if I fast for more than
like 24-48 hours
my energy reserves are generally gonna
be a little bit lower and that might be
not it might not be advantageous for a
max lift but maybe for like bodyweight
exercise but when it comes to doing a
max lift I would never go into it like a
lot of guys eat right before they get to
the gym or whatever I would typically
fast probably at least six to eight
hours sometimes 10 or 12 hours before if
I'm like really going for a metal or a
left yeah but I would eat up the weeks
the days before maybe even start out
three or four days before and start
eating like a lot of red meat and so
whenever I set a PR I kind of have this
whole sort of thing that I go through
where I eat up and I ramped up like 25%
more calories like kind of two days out
and I kind of protein everything and
it's not super scientific but I kind of
I put you know portion things out a
little bit different that I'm I go into
a calorie surplus the day before but
that day of I go into that max lift
fasted okay like where some people would
think it's insane drive to you know 12
hours fasted but in my strength is
definitely more I my nervous system is
better at recruiting muscle I'm pretty
sure of that I know I need to do the EMG
used to show it but I think would be an
interesting study to do yeah definitely
do you I mean do you find that in the
scientific community people look at you
differently based on you know if you
look at your Instagram for example I
mean your deadlifting way you're eating
tons of meat I mean it doesn't look like
you're a scientist I don't think I don't
think well if you're if you're studying
like sports science you know I mean
there's a lot of meatheads I guess yeah
go to like a sports science thing like
bodybuilder powerlifter kind of guys
this is something I've always done since
the age of like 1314
you know lifting weights my brother was
like a huge benchpress monster you know
I don't think I've ever even caught up
to him on that
I mean and he's not even he's never even
drank a protein shake before I mean he's
just intolerant fishing and just when
he's passed him by the bench he'll just
put four plates on it a weight is like
185 he's repping with like 4 or 5 so I
think the genetics were there ok though
he doesn't train legs or back even but
he still we worked on a farm together
for a while he always was just like that
farm strength and just like a crazy
bench strength so that really motivated
me as a kid to sort of try to be as
strong as him but also when I played
football I got into it mm-hmm so that's
always been part of like Who I am but I
don't necessarily especially now want to
make it my persona to do that but I want
it I want people to know for me strength
training is really an anti-aging therapy
and I think for me it's also like a
psychological therapy I don't know I
took a year off of training with weights
but I was working heavy on the farm
doing a lot of labor and I take the dogs
for a walk every night and jump up and
do a couple sets of chin ups and push
ups and dips so I was doing all that
kind of stuff but it took a year or more
completely away from weight so I didn't
even wake up a week but when I got back
to it I realized you know there is a
difference between sort of like lifting
weights and just kind of playing around
on the farm and doing push-ups and
Chin's I mean that stuff I still do that
stuff but lifting like serious weight or
the bars bending and you're it's almost
like a life or death kind of thing yeah
and whole the whole mentality of
approaching the lift is kind of what I
enjoy it's like I actually I envision a
scenario where it is life or death
and I'm kind of a calm person so I do
think I do some mental gymnastics to
basically create like a life-or-death
scenario or something that kind of gets
me my sympathetic nervous system
activated where I can do that and I miss
sort of that whole routine of doing that
so now I'm kind of embracing that I've
been doing that for the last couple
months now back in the gym I built my
wife and I used to go to the gym but
then we just like didn't have time so I
was like okay I'm just getting some
weights I'm going to put it in the house
and so I am enjoying the
home gym or barn gym a lot now and doing
that probably bout three times a week so
that but I don't think I get really a
stigma or right sometimes people
criticize me online for you know doing
certain podcasts or you know doing
research on a fad diet or I try not to
sensationalize the results that we have
and I talk within the realm of the
published science I think that's
important especially when you're doing
things research related to cancer
because I do get lots of emails from
Alzheimer's patients cancer patients and
patients with rare disorders and I do
not try to over promote or oversell the
diet in any way shape or form I try to
do the opposite actually and there are a
lot of people who are advocates of the q
Jing diet that just go too far and I try
to be a voice of reason that's somewhere
in the middle mm-hmm there's a lot of
antagonistic people who really maybe are
out to get me too and they just say the
ketogenic diet is dangerous it's not
yeah why do you think that is I think
there's different read a actually
believe that but I'm coming at it from
the perspective that the diet was a very
powerful medical therapy for epilepsy
and that's really I study seizures
that's most of my funding comes from
studying seizures so I'm convinced of
that
I guess the pushback comes from the
ketogenic diet as a lifestyle and like I
said it might not be optimal for most
people is probably not the clinical KJ
but a modified form of a low-carb diet
is undoubtably
I feel optimal getting back to your
question for humans and no point in
history did we have access to the level
of sugar processed carbohydrates that we
do now so it just makes I mean it's like
it just makes obvious sense to not
necessarily eliminate these things but
to minimize them in our diet so right
now they are the predominant source of
calories in the diet so yeah that really
are it's crazy the federal government
gives out like food stamps or they give
out supplements to people to buy it to
buy food
they're using those supplements for
sugary drinks and they're using it for
processed carbohydrates so this we need
to subsidize vegetable growers you know
fruits and vegetables predominant fruits
are a pretty good part of that too but
our government is basically their
programs are supporting the purchase of
heavily subsidized commodities that are
sort of linked to the corn industry and
soybean and these are all things I grew
growing up fine yeah right so I'm kind
of keenly aware of it but policy needs
to change Mark Hyman wrote a great book
and is really on top of this I would
recommend you know his recent podcast
with Peter Tia kind of covers that area
I mean I could talk about that a lot
because I'm very passionate about it but
it's not my wheelhouse not what it's
more of a sort of just a hobby of mine
that we are farmers too and we're trying
to do things the right way transitioning
from a crop farm a lot of people who
follow a vegan diet may and I respect
them for following it for ethical
reasons but I think they're a little bit
misdirected because even our farm when
we grew crops and having you know grown
wheat and hay and things like that when
you're running the hay baler in there I
mean you're chopping up lots of animals
you're topping up bunnies you're trying
field mice and things like that so you
know transferring a a crop field into a
field that we have now just of cows with
the weanlings and calves running around
just growing tons of grass which is a
huge carbon sink and you're you know
you're doing it to the point where max
you have one cow per two acres and you
are also most importantly rebuilding the
soil right and so you are not using
chemicals and you are you know raising
we have like basically for rescue cows
that didn't come from very good
conditions when the mom died when it was
like only a month or two
that is actually from a carnivore
perspective you are doing the earth a
much bigger service by basically
developing a carbon sink and the animals
will we may rescue the animals and keep
them for we may not sell them off but
we're basically raising beef and killing
a lot less animals by raising a carnival
food source right so yeah I do know from
the perspective of I think a lot of when
we talk about different diets there the
vegan diet versus a carnivore diet and I
understand the an ethical reason not to
kill animals intentionally for food but
when you grow crops and you you harvest
those crops you're killing a lot of
animals and I just remember very vivid
of just seeing like a nest of bunnies
just just there's no way around it I
mean when you're growing timothy hay for
example remove that or soybeans and
things like that there's tons of animals
that live there and when you have just a
pasture i mean the animals are free to
roam it's like perfect conditions i
could write you pictures i took on my
phone this morning the spanish moss and
the cows love to eat this manish moss
and you know they're growing in the most
idyllic conditions and they're free to
roam and other things are in the pasture
and everything is growing crazy
especially when the rain starts it
becomes a incredible carbon carbon sink
and also rebuilding the soil too that's
part of it
but prior to what we have now
it was intensively farmed heavily
treated with glyphosate GMO type crops
lots of fertilizer lots of chemicals
things like that so we're try we really
need to rebuild the soil so we just kind
of you know with the tractor just kind
of just moving the soil around planting
grass now just getting everything
growing so i think when it comes to like
food politics and what diet is optimal
for humans and some people may favor a
particular kind of diet i think there's
arguments on either side
know what cuz when you talk about a
carnivore diet and you're talking about
concentrated feedlot operations so that
is a very that is very destructive
what is it concentrated one like K foes
when you have concentrated agricultural
kind of feeding Lots the where the pigs
chickens or cattle I mean being the
being the thing that's probably most
destructive they are put into
concentrated quarters and they're
basically and they're not they're not
fed grass they may come when they're
born they may for the first year or so
they may be in a pasture but they're
shipped off they're shipped off to
feedlot operations where all their
nutrition comes from sort of corn and
soy and they're there for stomach system
is not really designed to digest the
simile and use this as an energy source
so you gotta give them like a lot of
antibiotics and they're concentrated in
areas where a lot of the manure and
everything there's significant runoff
and if this runoff is near crops then e
coli like can contaminate for example
the romaine lettuce or the the spinach
and things like that and then you have a
massive outbreak also you're more likely
to get a coli in from the food from this
type of feedlot operation because all
the food all the all the meat is mixed
together so if you have ground beef
you're eating beef from that package of
beef could be from hundreds of animals
right so if one is contaminated with
e-coli
or another bug you are can potentially
contaminating a lot of people whereas if
you support like a food co-op or a local
small farm right and you go there and
you know I've talked to many people who
run these farms I've watched many
documentaries right read many books no
one gets sick typically four
these operations that have been going on
in the federal government tries to crack
down on them because you know meat is
supposed to be USDA inspected and has to
go through certain the paperwork just to
be an organic function so you can buy on
the Shelf of Publix yeah just because to
like you know only a couple companies
really there's a couple companies that
monopolize this industry and the small
farms are taking away from that so the
federal government is actually it's
their bottom line right so they're
there's a lot of partnerships like
people perfect for these companies yeah
they're on federal scientific advisory
boards and and they hold their
influential and the policies associated
with this but the small farms and we're
trying to be a hobby farm now yeah but
this like people listening really need
to go out and buy locally support small
farms and it's going to be better for
their health like overall but but really
important for the environment too and I
think you know if you go to a local farm
you know there it may be a little bit
more expensive like upfront but in the
long run I think it's going to save
everybody money you support these I
think food will eventually get a little
bit cheaper if policies start to
subsidize these smaller farms so it
really has to start with government and
I think a movement has already started
but I think maybe in the next five to
ten years government subsidies can help
out a lot of these smaller farms than
they think are going to be really
essential for building back the
environment and and and I think food
will probably food will be much better
undoubtedly but I think it'll it'll be
more affordable too because that's
usually the pushback
well people can't afford right exactly
not convenient organic eggs are paying
three or four dollars a dozen but I
could go to Walmart anything I can get I
get sixty eggs for like and I do and
I've done that for like four dollars and
fifty cents because we give our dogs
like eggs or something like that
but when we can I mean we try to support
these these smaller farms whenever
possible I think locally so we're trying
to do that more and we're trying to
basically be sustainable just on our
farm you know from an energy standpoint
- with solar panels and stuff like that
oh that's amazing
yeah we're so where do you get your eggs
my wife buys them now but we buy them
locally occasionally but they could be
as much as five dollars for a half-dozen
she goes she's a big she comes from
Europe and she's loves to shop at Aldi
so Albie has certain standards so which
was it because I was kind of getting on
or buying like all this plastic and
stuff but we recycle everything but Aldi
has a new program now they're phasing
out all their packaging is going to be
like biodegradable oh wow the next
couple years so I mean they are usually
and it's like I think they're like
non-gmo like organic options and stuff
too and it was always kind of cheaper -
have you shopped at Aldi my house crab
box yeah yeah so we get a lot of stuff
from there occasionally we'll go to
Publix and stuff but like I said we get
a lot of the meat from some of these
companies like us wellness meats is
great we're eating their stuff now okay
put your box to butcher Buffy I'm pretty
good yeah and I think it's really hard
to find grass-finished like you can get
grass-fed but grass-finished a lot of
times what happens is cows will the last
month or two of their life they'll be
put on the feedlot
they'll be raised like their entire life
and a pasture right and so their pasture
raised but they'll be fattened up
towards the end and it does make them
happy I mean you could take some of the
pellets and stuff and you know I've
taken a handful and our cows I mean it's
like candy and it's like high-protein
and it's like everything but it's a
mixture of grains and things like that
so we just try to let them if we feed
them if the pastures not suitable enough
like this time of year is like the
driest part now we're getting into the
rain season but we'll just get some hay
like a combination of timothy and
alfalfa and things like that and spread
it around
just make sure you know we don't feed
them corn or how do you tell if it's
crossed finished or not
well it'll say it oh it will say okay
butcher box is they have grass finished
okay and it's very hard to find if you
find it at the stores around here you
know sometimes I post and promote a
butcher box because some of the
affiliate links does come back and
support our research okay so I kind of
justify it with that but I also justify
it that when they criticize it's not
that expensive it comes out to like
seven dollars a pound or eight dollars
but it's really quality beef and if you
bought similar grass-finished beef at a
store it would probably be more it's
just so hard in mind
you know but another thing is that they
have to the company sources some other
beef from Australia so some of it but
they're now they're working with small
or they did about a year or two ago
because I was asking them where they're
getting their beef as a cattle farm but
I think they're working with smaller
farms now okay so basically you know
because it's becoming more popular and
the demand will kind of influence the
supply personally if you were to be
diagnosed with some form of cancer how
would you treat yourself personally
would you use the standard of care with
chemotherapy depending on what cancer it
is and how would you alter your
lifestyle in your diet it's a bit of a
loaded question I know sorry no I'm glad
I guess I get asked this question a lot
it really comes down to the type of
cancer like I know friends and
colleagues of mine kind of feel that
cancer is sort of you know all one
disease and I think there's a lot of
truth to that but also understand that
you know I have people that are close to
me that have cancers for example
leukemia acute myeloid leukemia as an
example I know people with multiple
myeloma lymphoma testicular cancer had
one or two or three students or three
people that I know responded very well
to the standard of care and some of them
did the ketogenic diet some
so it really depends on the type type of
cancer the I got into this looking at
brain cancer so it made sense to me
because I realize oh brain cancer
patients have seizures and they're on
heavy doses of anti-seizure drugs
sometimes but they're also put on
something called dexamethasone which is
a corticosteroid that really disrupts
your metabolism and elevates your
glucose in a way that's feeding the
cancer these corticosteroids do so I
thought the ketogenic diet could be used
for that and then the more I started
looking to it I saw that Thomas Seyfried
had published that a calorie restricted
ketogenic diet targeted tumor metabolism
in a way that was highly efficacious at
least in animal models so so it really
I'm just saying that's because it really
depends on the type of cancers a couple
reviews have been written about the
types of cancers so things that are
really metabolically demanding cancers
and these are cancers that would show up
on a PET scan and fdg-pet scan so if
someone has a type of tumor a solid
tumor in particular that's really hot on
a PET scan and that means that it's
sucking up massive amounts of glucose
relative to the healthy tissue
surrounding it so what a ketogenic
strategy does and it could be used as an
adjuvant to the standard of care is that
its lowers glucose availability to the
tumor and most tumors really have
accelerated glucose metabolism and
that's driven in part by insulin and
insulin signaling like
igf-1 the pi3 kinase Akt mTOR pathway i
don't want to go down that road but it's
activated it's driven by
glucose insulin and the insulin sort of
pathway right so if we suppress the
hormone insulin we can do that with
nutritional ketosis especially if it's
calorie restricted that basically is
knocking down a major driver of most
cancers like it's it's pretty safe to
say that I would say 80% or more cancers
are
driven by this pi3 kinase Akt mTOR
pathway when these pathways are hyper
activated and insulin being a driver for
that it accelerates cancer growth and
proliferation so one way to take the
foot off the gas gas pedal of this
cancer growth and proliferation is to
knock down the prime one of the main
pathways accelerating it which is which
is insulin and how do we knock down
insulin through carbohydrate restriction
and to some extent protein restriction
also fasting intermittent fasting where
we go through periods of time restricted
eating so if we were to do this prior to
the standard of care like chemotherapy
or radiation
it makes the tumors more vulnerable to
modalities that kill through what we
call an oxidative stress mechanism so if
you limit glucose availability to a
tumor and if you're in a fasted State
the tumors ability to create its own
antioxidants glutathione being a major
one is a bit impaired so you can enhance
the cancer killing effects of chemo and
radiation if the patient is in a a
fasted state or on a ketogenic diet we
also think that hyperbaric oxygen
therapy which increases the partial
pressure of oxygen in the tissues and
thereby also enhances oxidative stress
and the oxidative stress is higher in
cancer cells because of the aberrant
mitochondria that they have they spit
out more something called superoxide in
response to increasing levels of oxygen
relative to normal cells so you'll have
enhanced oxidative stress in cancer
cells also more free heme and when you
it creates a drive something called the
Fenton reaction you don't need to know
that but listeners may be familiar with
these pathways but it creates a scenario
where oxidative stress is higher just by
using something that's relatively
non-toxic like hyperbaric oxygen therapy
within defined limits and then if you
give radiation or chemo that could
enhance the efficacy of that especially
in the context of a ketogenic diet so
and chemo could essentially boost the
effects of hyperbaric treatment
yeah well the efficacy of radiation is
proportional to the po2 of the tumor
right so if you radiate a tumor that's
hypoxic the radiation killing effect of
the tumor will be dependent on molecular
oxygen that's inside the tumor so if you
hyper oxygenate a tumor or if you
reverse tumor hypoxia because a lot of
tumors they grow so fast that outstrips
their ability the the vascular church
can't keep up with the expanding biomass
so the the inside of the tumor the core
of the tumor becomes anoxic or hypoxic
but if you with hyperbaric oxygen the
oxygen is transferred to the tumor not
by blood vessels but it's in plasma
hemoglobin is already saturated so it
gets oxygen to the plasma and then you
hyperox innate the tumor reverse a tumor
hypoxia and then apply the the stimulus
the killing stimulus so that could be
chemotherapy it could be radiation it
could be immune based drug to we call
this the press pulse theory so if you
google like press pulse theory and a
publication nutrition metabolism this
idea that you create a stress on the
cancer cells by nutritional ketosis
drugs like metformin intermittent
fasting exercise meditation things like
that creates an environment that
compromises the tumors ability to grow
or decreases its ability to grow being
in a fasted State will also make the
tumor more vulnerable by weakening its
antioxidant defenses and and also
suppressing certain growth pathways that
pi3 kinase pathway and then and then
other modalities will work better so
that could be hyperbaric oxygen therapy
could be used but chemo radiation and
immune based therapies too will be more
efficacious in the context of a press so
a press and then a pulse
therapy can be delivered ideally like
two or three weeks on you know three
weeks off something like that it depends
on the particular agents but there's
also metabolic drugs that can be used
too and some of these drugs are toxic
like 2d oxy glue
those three Burma pyruvate Luneta mean
these are things that target the
glycolytic pathways okay and we use
these sort of these things
experimentally but I think what patients
who are listening maybe can go and look
up the press pulse concept and we just
basically put a paper out as a concept
here's an idea
we are working with different people
that are moving this into the clinic and
some people are just doing it because
right now there's no not a whole lot of
clinical trials that are incorporating
this although I have to say that when I
started studying this the ketogenic diet
there was maybe two clinical trials and
now I looked this morning before coming
there was 39 clinical trials yeah and
about many of them are ongoing or
recruiting to Soho wow so now these are
you know many of them a lot of them are
top tier institutes like doing things
and then I looked up fasting I never
like went onto clinical trials.gov and
putting cancer and then fasting and like
hundreds of trials came up not all of
them are relevant but there was dozens
of trials looking at the effects of
fasting before chemo and radiation hmm
many the first like couple were using
the fasting mimicking diet
so Valter Longo who's on the west coast
developed a diet that essentially used
five days per month and it's a hypo
caloric diet that puts the body into a
state of ketosis mild ketosis and and
this type of diet can be used in
conjunction with standard of care and
it's a it's sort of a commercialized
version of a ketogenic diet and it's
mostly plant-based so it has some unique
aspects to it one could formulate their
own ketogenic diet or their own fasting
mimicking diet just by going to the
grocery store and and formulating the
foods so so the sciences is really
ongoing and it's emerging but to have
dozens of registered clinical trials
looking at the effects of fasting and
cancer as a means to enhance standard of
care and and patients should also if
they're interested in being part of
these clinical trials clinical trials
gov that's the basically the site that
has registered
so look a ketogenic diet and then your
whatever cancer you have whether it be
lung cancer endometrial cancer liver
cancer or something like that so look up
to see if maybe a clinical trials in
your area and you might be you know
might be able to participate in that
when they talk about the hyperbaric
oxygen treatment did they use those like
tube things that like LeBron James gets
into after his basketball games where he
lays down and like it's got like a
coffin shaped tube yeah that was a user
that that would be that's a mono placed
chamber okay yeah so that that could be
one of ways there's also a multi place
chamber that you could use but if you go
to a hyperbaric oxygen clinic what they
may do is most of these clinics actually
they're there's 14 different
fda-approved applications for a
hyperbaric oxygen therapy oh really one
is decompression sickness if you're a
diver you know you come up with the
bends you go inside a hyperbaric chamber
the other is for I mean there's there's
a lot but the top ones would be diabetic
wounds so wounds people who have
diabetes their blood is like sludge so
they're not getting enough oxygen and
nutrition to the wound so it begins to
fester and grow and hyperbaric oxygen
therapy hyper oxygen aids to wound a
wound is hypoxic and the energy levels
in that tissue are knocked down by like
90% so hyperbaric oxygen therapy can
restore metabolism we also believe if
you put someone on a ketone supplement
or and one of my students dr. Shannon
Cassell did her PhD dissertation on the
effects of nutritional ketosis and wound
healing and is remarkably effective
enhancing the wound healing process Wow
and we think if you couple it with
hyperbaric oxygen it would be you know
diabetic wounds or chronic wounds it's
like a multi multi-billion dollar health
problem right now that people have
typically with type 2 diabetes but
people have bed sores right like these
wounds they don't heal nutritional
ketosis is one so hyperbaric oxygen is
used for that and so you have multi
place chambers you can get in you go in
you read a book you listen to music
sometimes the walls of the chamber are
transparent so you can see what's going
on in the room and then you have a multi
place chamber we
get inside the chamber it's pressurized
to like say 2 or 2.5 atmospheres
at hyperbaric air and then you put the
mask on and that's 100 percent oxygen
and you breathe that mask and then you
reach hyperbaric oxygen therapy levels
you take the mask off so if you have a
seizure you can take the mask off and
then you go from hyperbaric oxygen to
hyperbaric air which the partial
pressure P the po2 will be low enough
that you won't have a seizure that sense
yeah the mesons so we're breathing 20%
oxygen now a hyperbaric oxygen chamber
you were breathing in a mono place
chamber you're breathing a hundred
percent oxygen
typically or there abouts and when you
get inside a multi place chamber it's 20
percent oxygen but you put the mask on
that becomes 100 oxygen and hemoglobin
is already saturated right but the
oxygen gets into the plasma and that's
the benefit to wound healing that's the
benefit to attacking a tumor is that
tumor vasculature is like erratic and
not very good so the tumor becomes
hypoxic but if it's in the plasma it can
penetrate that tumor oh wow and then
oxygen can kick on reactive oxygen
species I can start to kill the tumor
inside out and then you apply most
chemotherapeutic drugs kill cancer cells
through an oxidative stress mechanism so
if you've already you know cause
oxidative stress and you apply oxy
platen or cisplatin or something like
that and then radiation too then you
have like it creates a lot more die-off
on the tumor okay that and then being in
ketosis will protect your healthy cells
and also sensitize the tumor cells to
more so that was sort of you know some
of the first publications that we did
and when people are following up on that
well it's amazing how many more studies
have come out and how many how do you
mean the clinical trials you were saying
the other day yeah the clinical trials
is really handsome AZ you know we're not
doing any because we're more of a basic
science but people look at the research
that we're doing and they say hey you
know just some people give us a heads up
and like you know your your research
kind of inspired this clinical trial
other people were doing this research to
dr. Thomas Seyfried it was a huge
pioneer and I just followed in his
footsteps and
just used his model system Lu Cantley is
doing some work with the ketogenic diet
and targeting this pi3 kinase pathway
with different drugs dr. Adrienne check
she was at Barrow Neurological Institute
is really a pioneer in glioblastoma
which is the deadly form of brain cancer
and her work has inspired you know the
Barrow Neurological Institute and the
lead clinician there Chris Smith to sort
of advocate that patients with
glioblastoma
glioblastoma followed the ketogenic diet
prior to them coming in and having
surgery because it helps shrink the
tumor and makes it a smaller target that
they can resect it and they get better
outcomes you know after after surgery -
so I've been communicating with some of
those patients and obviously it's a
super hot topic right now the
coronavirus yeah what what sort of
knowledge do you have about viruses like
that and kind of like what's going on
with it right now there's a couple cases
in Florida what what would you say to
people about that kind of virus and sort
of like mitigating it or you know what
is your knowledge or research if any on
stuff on viruses like this and how to
avoid them well you know I've taken the
basic chords like human or you know
pathogenic microbiology biology stuff
like that so from what I know probably
you know it the people most concerned
are people immunocompromised - very
young and they're very old so just the
standard sort of things wash your hands
stay away from people that are sick
there are many people that are
asymptomatic so we could be walking
around and be a corona virus carrier but
be asymptomatic and not be presenting so
that that in that case that it might be
good to just you know stay at home when
you can you know because you don't know
who carrier could be so I think that's
important information our immune systems
are really a function to some extent on
our systemic and metabolic health right
so I think nutrition is really key we
want to
overnutrition compromises the immune
system
lack of sleep compromises the immune
system elevated blood glucose can
compromise the immune system so things
like intermittent fasting low carb diets
ketogenic diets can make the immune
system more vigilant to be able to deal
with these types of things you know if
they happen so we're better better off
to fight it you know in the context I
think there's some studies out there you
know showing I know there's studies
adrin checked the the researcher that I
mentioned showed that the immune system
becomes more vigilant with a ketogenic
diet in in regard to anti-cancer
immunity so increasing natural killer
cells and things like that that can
better attack you know on the cancer I
believe that that's the case for viruses
and microbes do I know you mentioned
earlier that when you feel that I said
like something coming on like any sort
of bug or something you will
automatically go into like a two day
fast or something - yeah do I actually
pay a lot more attention to my sleep
staying hydrated if I don't completely
fast I cut way back on calories and just
go into a calorie restriction state but
typically yeah oh that's when I'll start
and say okay well time to do a
short-term fast and I'll fast for a
couple days yeah yeah and I just hardly
ever get sick my wife will get sick you
know multiple times and I'll get I feel
a little something come on and it'll
never really hit our lab just went to LA
it was kind of alarming that some of
them got sick about how rhythm and I
didn't really get anything and or I felt
a little scratch in my throat a little
sniffles but nothing ever happened so I
think my immune systems definitely a lot
better now than it was when I was not
doing the Q genic diet like you know act
1 knowledge yeah like clockwork when I
was you know finals would come I would
almost always get sick the end of
November right around that time it was
like like clockwork and sometimes even
in the spring with finals so our immune
system is really tied to psychological
stress I think can wipe our immune
system al I mean looking back there was
periods of time
I mean physically I was doing everything
right but I was just put under a lot of
psychological stress and it just like
crushed me really yeah and just a couple
times you know that I can't remember
when certain life things just come up
you know so I think people really need
to pay attention and just kind of harder
to a little bit harder to manage right
but but be cognizant that our mental
state and behavioral effects behavioral
health probably have a the biggest
impact on our immune system so something
a lot of people just think about stated
otherwise yeah psychological stress can
be in a very powerful immunosuppressant
and make you a vulnerable target to
something like homeowners so so our kind
of philosophy is that we were like
nature people so we I allocate a certain
amount of time each day for creative
downtime where we get out we go in the
woods we explore things we have you know
a lot of property around us that we have
you know that are just mostly forests so
we do forestry too and spend a lot of
time just outside with our pets and
unplug - from your devices so I think
it's important you know a certain time
at night I just put my cell phone on
airplane mode and just unplug and we do
some downtime stuff like yeah yeah just
hours before bed yeah I know me sleep
better so like super important I think
for people's psychological health
because they're so we're so wired and
just so attentive to our phones and
that's kind of we're very a reactive
sort of species and we do it and we
don't even know that it's compromising
our health yeah I think it's important
for people to recognize that yeah I
think I also it really resonates me when
you talk about sleep and how much you
pay attention to sleep I recently
started I recently got a Sleep Number
bed and it tells you like it tells you
how you slept huge like a score and how
restless you were or whatever yeah and
it's paying attention to that I've
really noticed a huge difference in like
you know my cognitive clarity you know
how well I feel during the day and yeah
you know getting sick less it's it's a
huge difference and I keep going back
for some reason on this podcast too
basketball references but LeBron James
and I read all his interviews where he
talks about his number one his number
one thing that's most important to him
when training or anything like that or
nutrition or practice even like the
number one thing most important thing to
him is sleep like yeah sleep cannot get
in the way of anything and he rigorously
sleeps nine to ten hours a night and
takes two to three hour naps every day
and he has he has his own personal
hyperbaric oxygen chamber he travels
with and like yeah yeah that's a big
topic so hyperbaric oxygen can increase
stem-cell production it also stimulates
the release of those stem cells and
those stem cells can go in and hone in
on sites of injury and inflammation and
enhance the in repair processes so it's
debated on how that works but if they
hone in and they collect in a certain
area they also release various growth
factors that can help in skeletal muscle
protein synthesis and and repair may be
anti-inflammatory effects yeah so I'm
not convinced of the science but a lot
of people send me papers and say look at
this should I be using a hyperbaric like
NFL players and things like for that
kind of stuff yeah and I say you know it
look I I haven't seen any big but
clinical trials but the basic science
kind of says it's there I know Stephen
Thumb who's also funded by the office of
Navy research was the first one of the
first to show that hyperbaric oxygen
therapy almost works like this drug
gm-csf
which is a sort of an activator of of
our stem cells and you can recruit
increased levels and it's used
therapeutically in cancer patients and
different patients that it almost has
the same ability as this is drug which
is extremely expensive to actually
influence the production and the release
of stem cells really so there was a
hotel there gm-csf and I think it's Luke
I nor neupogen
you know if you go these are very
expensive drugs that are used for a
number of applications some of them
experimentally for like neurological
diseases but also cancer patients and
stuff use them for for through different
applications so so granule granular site
yeah see gm-csf g-csf and gm-csf
so Luca and Newton so these are drugs
I'm not super familiar with but I became
familiar with it when some discussions
were about hyperbaric oxygen we're
referencing these drugs in relation to
the ability of hyperbaric oxygen to
recruit and stimulate the production and
release of stem cells that can enhance
you know tissue injury and repair so so
there is I get a lot of questions about
hyperbaric oxygen therapy and athletes
and okay there's some I just say the
jury's still out but I think okay and I
do that to be protective because my
contracts are actually to study the
negative effects of hyperbaric oxygen
over study oxygen toxicity seizures
which are the seizures that are
generated from hyperbaric oxygen being
too high so I study the negative setting
the negative effects of high-pressure
oxygen and why we need to avoid it and
develop mitigation strategies against it
but understand that hyperbaric oxygen
therapy is within a defined limit and
that limit is set by the potential to
get oxygen toxicity seizures so within
that therapeutic limit it can have
anti-cancer effects that I talked about
you know it can have there's 14
different fda-approved applications so
an emerging application could be
recovery of athletes you know from this
and I think there are these home
hyperbaric chambers that you can get on
eBay for like 15 right to 2500 royalties
they may provide some benefit if you're
a high-end athlete and it gives you that
0.5% you know benefit or if you're
recovering faster you know that it may
be something to invest in I mean science
is pointing into it but it's not I'm not
Kim
so LaVon is there any any benefit to
someone like you know like you or I to
have that in their home kind of like as
a as a therapeutic thing for someone who
just casually works out or wants to be
healthier yeah well you know I I
communicate a lot with vets so people
with traumatic brain injury and
concussions and I think sadly this is an
area that's not fda-approved so I would
encourage people to check out you know
the use of hyperbaric oxygen for
traumatic brain injury concussions and
we know that hyperbaric oxygen at very
high levels is a stimulant to the brain
and you can overstimulate it to have a
seizure right but when it's done at
lower levels lower therapeutic levels it
can augment and it can reduce
inflammation it can stimulate processes
where the adaptive response is the
repair of the injury and when you have a
concussion or a blast injury its
rupturing blood vessels so you have
these hypoxic pockets and when you go
like these areas of the brain that don't
have enough oxygen that's what I mean by
that
so hyperbaric oxygen therapy can restore
oxygenation into those areas and start
to enhance the healing process in the
brain so there's a lot of data to
support it and we will be presenting at
hyperbaric oxygen therapy conference
2020 and we're a lot of vets will be
talking about this NFL players and I
think we need more research but I think
the research is pretty good with stroke
injury and hyperbaric are in animal
models and now some evidence in patients
so it's not an fda-approved application
but another consideration that needs
more attention federal funding if you
have a traumatic brain injury a
concussion or stroke I think people
should look into not going to advocate
it because I need to stay within the
realm right but I think people really
need to look at the potential for a
hyper
therapy and we're always trying to get
research to study this because I feel
it's one of the most important topics
that need to be studied brain injury
traumatic brain injury and using the
hyperbaric oxygen in addition to ketosis
so the two together we feel would be
very therapeutic for recovery of
patients especially if it's done
immediately after but even patients
maybe that had the injury a while back
we think it would have some benefit they
start Wow well that's been a bunch of
that's been a incredible amount of
knowledge is dropped I really appreciate
you doing this man I've kept you here
for about two hours now platform yeah
man
absolutely it's a it's a privilege
people to have someone like you on here
so hopefully we will get the opportunity
to do it again in the future and and oh
yeah tell everyone where they can find
you online and learn more about what
your what you're doing or yeah go to we
have a company ketone technologies LLC
but that companies more research and
development but we have a website that
talk about what we do as a company and
and also keto nutrition is really my
main information website I don't sell
any products on that but if there's
products on there that I've used and
recommend and I use personally and
there's consultants on there there's
podcasts on there like the Tim Ferriss
Joe Rogan podcast are on there and stuff
so it's more of an information website
for people and it's kind of like a
one-stop shop and we also have a blog so
check out the blog we've hit a lot of
topics that we've discussed and the blog
will go into more depth and detail on
each of those topics what is the blog
called it's if you go to keto nutrition
Oh our G okay it's a dot website it's
just the blog so just on the bar at the
top just click on blog and it hits
things from different types of ketone
supplements - diabetes - all sorts of
topics on there so yeah but it gets into
a little bit more detail awesome man
[Music]